Site Title: Ravi Town Lahore
Site Description: The River Ravi is by far the most polluted river in Pakistan. The river gets most polluted while flowing through the regions between Lahore and Balloki. Much of the waste products are deposited in the river which contaminates its water. The river has been reduced to a channel due to the serious and heavy pollution discharges.  Ravi River flowing through both India and Pakistan originates at the Banghal basin. The river flows at a great speed through the region but is unfortunately the most polluted river in Pakistan. Ravi waters both India and Pakistan. Since its source is in India it flows through the northwestern part of Chamba and through the southwestern part of Jammu and Kashmir. Finally it reaches Pakistan to water the land of India's neighbor. The river drains a total catchment area of 14,442 square kilometers (5,576 sq mi) in India after flowing for a length of 725 kilometers (450 mi).  The Ravi valley in its upper reaches has Deodar, walnut, Quercus ilex, daphne, mulberry, alder, edible pine (Pinus gerardiana), twisted cypress (Cupressus torulosa), chinar (Platanus orientalis), daphne papyracea, cedrela serata, and sisso, olive and kakkar (raus).   According to official studies, the Ravi is the most polluted river in Pakistan. Most wastewater discharge reaches the river in a 60 km stretch between Balloki and Lahore. The Ravi is currently estimated to receive 47 percent of the total municipal and industrial discharge pumped into all rivers of Pakistan. In addition, industrial and agricultural waste from both India and Pakistan pour into the river through the Hudaira drain, which enters the Ravi on Lahore's outskirts.  As the River has died a slow and painful death, the fishing communities that for generations made a living from its waters have suffered too. The extreme pollution of the River Ravi has destroyed most of the 42 species of fish that once lived in the river, as well as the bird life around it, which has migrated to other areas. The survival of small invertebrates, micro fauna and flora is also threatened. (WWF Pakistan)  The weather of the area is extreme. Winters are very cold and summers are very hot with temperature soaring up to 40 C, but at the time of study it was pleasant. The direction of the wind  was southwards.  The Ravi has been transformed into the river of death which is playing havoc with the health of the citizens. As many as 42 species of fish have become extinct from the river. Dumping of sacrificial meat, industrial and hospital waste on the river-beds have made the situation worse. Various pathways are involved like:  drinking of contaminated water use of groundwater and surface water for drinking and irrigating children play at polluted place inhalation of polluted air
Health Impacts: The results of the pollution are clearly visible. Most children who swim, dive and play daily in the waters of the river, have skin lesions, boils, rashes and infections caused by the water.  The impact on the local community of the pollution of the Ravi is immense. People are suffering serious ailments. Hepatitis, skin infections, stomach disorders and respiratory tract infections are  major health issues being faced by local residents.